Add file system usage documentation [ENG-148] (#156)
aai-institute/lakefs-spec: docs/guides/filesystem-usage.md

# How to use the lakeFS file system

This guide contains instructions and code snippets on how to use the lakeFS file system.

## The lakeFS URI structure

In the following subsections, we frequently make use of [lakeFS URIs](https://docs.lakefs.io/understand/model.html#lakefs-protocol-uris) in the example code.
lakeFS URIs identify resources in a lakeFS deployment through a unique path consisting of repository name, lakeFS revision/ref name, and file name relative to the repository root.

As an example, a URI like `repo/main/file.txt` addresses the `file.txt` file on the `main` branch in the repository named `repo`.

In some lakeFS file system operations, directories are also allowed as resource names.
For example, the URI `repo/main/data/` (note the trailing slash) refers to the `data` directory on the `main` branch in the `repo` repository.

## On staged versus committed changes

> When uploading, copying, or removing files or directories from a branch, those removal operations are staged changes until another commit is created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When uploading, copying, or removing files or directories from a branch, those operations will result in staged changes in the repository until a commit is created.
```

`lakefs-spec` does not create these commits automatically, since it separates file operations from versioning operations rigorously.

> If you want to conduct versioning operations, like creating commits, between file transfers, the best way to do so is by using a **filesystem transaction**.

Reviewer: Start a new paragraph here for readability.

I would go ahead and create a `TODO` placeholder page in the user guide for the transactions, so we can already link it here.

Author: Done in [8cb6e79](https://github.com/aai-institute/lakefs-spec/pull/156/commits/8cb6e79eb899e72e761a99bcc1827c728e808cfb).

# How to use the lakeFS file system

This guide contains instructions and code snippets on how to use the lakeFS file system.

## The lakeFS URI structure

In the following subsections, we frequently make use of [lakeFS URIs](https://docs.lakefs.io/understand/model.html#lakefs-protocol-uris) in the example code.
lakeFS URIs identify resources in a lakeFS deployment through a unique path consisting of repository name, lakeFS revision/ref name, and file name relative to the repository root.

As an example, a URI like `repo/main/file.txt` addresses the `file.txt` file on the `main` branch in the repository named `repo`.

In some lakeFS file system operations, directories are also allowed as resource names.
For example, the URI `repo/main/data/` (note the trailing slash) refers to the `data` directory on the `main` branch in the `repo` repository.

## On staged versus committed changes

When uploading, copying, or removing files or directories from a branch, those removal operations will result in staged changes in the repository until a commit is created.

> `lakefs-spec` does not create these commits automatically, since it separates file operations from versioning operations rigorously.

Reviewer: I would say it goes a bit beyond the scope of this page

This section concerns the explicitly implemented operations. In addition, there are a number of file system APIs inherited from the [`AbstractFileSystem` interface in fsspec](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html#fsspec.spec.AbstractFileSystem).

More information on file system usage can be found in the [`fsspec` documentation](https://filesystem-spec.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html#use-a-file-system).

### Uploading and downloading files

The arguably most important feature of the file system is file transfers.

#### File uploads

To upload a file, you can use the `fs.put()` and `fs.put_file()` methods. 
While `fs.put_file()` operates on single files only, the `fs.put()` API can be used for directory uploads.

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

# remote path, then local target path.
fs.put_file("file.txt", "my-repo/my-ref/file.txt")
```

If you want to upload an entire directory to lakeFS, you can use the `fs.put()` API together with the `recursive=True` switch:

```python
# structure:
#   dir/a.txt
#      /b.yaml
#      /c.csv
#      /...

> fs.put("dir", "my-repo/my-ref/dir", recursive=True)

Reviewer: Having tried this, does not actually work, but rather raises an error:

```
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/work/lakefs-spec/.sandbox/demo.py", line 17, in <module>
    fs.put("data", f"{REPO}/{BRANCH}/data/", recursive=True)
  File "/work/lakefs-spec/.direnv/python-3.11/lib/python3.11/site-packages/fsspec/spec.py", line 1069, in put
    self.put_file(lpath, rpath, **kwargs)
  File "/work/lakefs-spec/src/lakefs_spec/spec.py", line 437, in put_file
    local_checksum = md5_checksum(lpath, blocksize=self.blocksize)
                     ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/work/lakefs-spec/src/lakefs_spec/util.py", line 11, in md5_checksum
    with open(lpath, "rb") as f:
         ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
IsADirectoryError: [Errno 21] Is a directory: '/work/lakefs-spec/data'
```

The root cause is that the internal implementation resolves the local path (`fs.expand_path(lpath, recursive=recursive, maxdepth=maxdepth)` in `AbstractFileSystem.put()`), but that includes the directory itself, not just the files contained therein.

The below seems to do the trick (note that the `**` glob runs into the same problem): 

```suggestion
fs.put("dir/*", "my-repo/my-ref/dir", recursive=True)
```

However, this might be worth following up on, because it makes for some surprising behavior when compared to regular globs.

Reviewer: I'll change the occurrences in this file to something that works, but let's still follow up on this later on.

Reviewer: Addressed in 7e09b41c9f7d3ac7a0b2582832432358ebf4ff42, which makes changing the example unnecessary.

    ```python
    fs = LakeFSFileSystem()
    
    fs.put_file("my-repo/my-ref/file.txt", "file.txt", use_blockstore=True)
    ```

    Direct lakeFS blockstore uploads require the installation of the corresponding `fsspec` file system implementation through `pip`.
    For an S3-based lakeFS deployment, install the `s3fs` package. For Google Cloud Storage (GCS), install the `gcsfs` package.
    For Azure blob storage, install the `adlfs` package.

#### File downloads

To download a file, you can use the `fs.get()` or `fs.get_file()` methods.
While `fs.get_file()` downloads single files only, the `fs.get()` API can be used for recursive directory downloads.

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

# remote path, then local target path.
fs.get_file("my-repo/my-ref/file.txt", "file.txt")
```

In the case of a directory in lakeFS, use the `fs.get()` API together with the `recursive=True` switch:

```python
# structure:
#   dir/a.txt
#      /b.yaml
#      /c.csv
#      /...

# downloads the entire `dir` directory (and subdirectories) into the current directory.

> fs.get("my-repo/my-ref/dir", "dir", recursive=True)

Reviewer: This does not work at all, but due to other reasons than for `put(..., recursive=True)`. It seems that the implementation of `AbstractFileSystem.expand_paths` might need to be overwritten for our case since it expands the paths without the `{repo}/{branch}/` prefix:

```
rpaths = self.expand_path(rpath, recursive=recursive, maxdepth=maxdepth)

# rpath = 'repo/main/data/'
# rpaths = ['data/weather-2010.json', 'data/weather-2010s.json', 'data/weather-2020.json', 'data/weather-2020s.json', 'repo/main/data/']
```

This leads to errors down the road when the code enters `get_file` for these rpaths, since they obviously don't `parse()` correctly.

Reviewer: Addressed in 7e09b41c9f7d3ac7a0b2582832432358ebf4ff42 and through #166.

```

### Checking the existence of lakeFS objects

To check the existence of a file in a given revision of a repository, you can use the `fs.exists()` API:

```python
from lakefs_spec import LakeFSFileSystem

fs = LakeFSFileSystem()

my_file_exists = fs.exists("my-repo/my-ref/my-file.txt")
```

This function returns `True` if the file exists on that revision, and `False` if it does not. Errors (e.g. permission errors) will be raised, since in that case, object existence cannot be decided.

!!! Warning
    
    `fs.exists()` only works on file objects, and will return `False` if called on directories.

### Obtaining info on stored objects

> To query the metadata of a single object in a lakeFS repository (similar to the POSIX `stat` function), use the `fs.info()` API:

Reviewer: Ha, this was probably changed by accident, Nico and I had agreed to leave out the POSIX reference.

```suggestion
To query the metadata of a single object in a lakeFS repository, use the `fs.info()` API:
```
